---
sidebar_position: 1
description: Introduce the core structures of OpsChain.
---

# Structure overview

OpsChain provides a hierarchical structure to organise your execution pipeline.

## Principles

The three structure types available in OpsChain are:

- Projects
- Environments
- Assets

Each of these structure types can be nested to create a hierarchy. Each is uniquely defined by their hierarchy and a code, allowing OpsChain to uniquely identify them by their _path_.

### Codes

Every structure in OpsChain has a code. This code is used to identify the structure in the UI and in the API.

- **Project code**: The project code is a per-OpsChain instance unique identifier used to identify the project.
- **Environment code**: The environment code is a per-project unique identifier used to identify the environment within a project.
- **Asset code**: The asset code is a per-parent unique identifier used to identify the asset within a project or environment. Since an asset can be a child of a project or an environment, it is unique only within its parent.

:::info
The code has some strict rules:

- it must be unique within the parent resource
- it must only contain lowercase letters, numbers and underscores.
- it cannot be updated after the resource is created.

:::

### Paths

Given every resource has a code, OpsChain uses the resource's hierarchy to build the resource's path. This path is extensively used within OpsChain to identify resources and to build URLs.

For example, the following resource structure:

- Project: `my-project`
  - Asset 1: `my-asset`
  - Environment: `my-environment`
    - Asset 2: `my-asset`

Would have the following paths:

- **Project**: `/projects/my-project`
- **Environment**: `/projects/my-project/environments/my-environment`
- **Asset 1**: `/projects/my-project/assets/my-asset`
- **Asset 2**: `/projects/my-project/environments/my-environment/assets/my-asset`

## Projects

Projects are the top-level structure in OpsChain. They are used to organise your assets and asset templates, environments, Git repositories and workflows.

## Environments

Environments represent the logical infrastructure environments under a [project](#project) (for example Development or Production). They are used to store your assets.

## Assets

Assets are the lowest level structure in OpsChain and can be inside a project or an environment.
